I even remain, and looking for the upper taker,
not the undertaker, amen.
And what a blessing.
Matthew chapter number 16 this evening,
and as you're turning there, I wanna remind you,
if you would pray for Miss Norma Jean.
Donna and Regina have not been able to be here today.
I chatted with Norma Jean this afternoon.
She's still dealing with a great deal of pain
in her leg, hip area,
and so she's got an appointment at 1.30 tomorrow,
and she is hoping that as she goes to that appointment,
that they'll be able to determine what's going on,
and whether it means that they have to take some x-rays
or MRIs or what needs to happen
to try to figure out that pain.
And so if you pray for Norma Jean,
I know that she'd greatly appreciate that.
Matthew chapter number 16 this evening,
over the past three weeks here on Sunday evenings,
we have focused our attention on sharing the gospel,
and it's not enough to simply understand
the responsibility that God has given us
to share the gospel,
but we must know how to share the gospel.
I have found people over the years
that say they have a desire to tell others about Jesus,
but they feel intimidated, they feel overwhelmed,
they have fear.
I said many times over the last three weeks
that that first door that I knock on
every time I go out door knocking,
yesterday morning, the very first door I knocked on the door
I had a measure of fear,
and it's just something that happens every single time.
But man, it is a joy to know that you're going
in the power of the Lord, that you said I will be with thee
and we have the opportunity to be able to share Christ,
to share the gospel,
and God gave us some open doors yesterday.
And we went through last week
and shared a number of different
really kind of just practical tips.
And at the end of the service,
we had you break up and interact with someone
that you'd not yet previously shared your testimony with
and share your testimony with them.
And I got some real positive feedback from that.
And I appreciate the opportunity.
It was a joy as I stood here and kind of just observed
and saw what was going on.
And of course, I mentioned at the end of the service
that the idea was to get you a little bit
out of your comfort zone here
so that we would be equipped to be able to go out there
and share our testimony, share the gospel.
And what a joy that is.
I believe that those three weeks of lessons
really helped us and paved the way, if you will,
for the message this evening.
And we've been dealing with this subject matter
on Sunday evenings.
It started just a few weeks ago
of Ask the Pastor throughout the summer.
And many people submitted questions.
We had forms that were available for you.
And I know that there's a number of you
that still have forms
because I know how many we printed out
and I know how many I got back.
And so some of you still have forms
that you haven't submitted.
And you give it to me on like August 31st.
It's not gonna get answered until next year
because we're starting with a new series in September.
And so if you have them, get them into me.
But the question that I'm going to seek
to answer this evening,
as I believe, again, the last three weeks
really built the foundation for this,
the question is asked this way.
How do churches grow according to the Bible?
I think it's a great question
and worthy of our consideration.
And really, as I look at the question,
I then also ask a couple of questions.
Number one, this question comes to mind,
should churches grow?
I think obviously the answer to that would be yes,
a church should grow.
I then ask this follow-up question
as I was preparing and just working
on developing the message,
is all growth, when we talk about church growth,
is all growth numeric?
In other words, you talk about numeric growth,
oftentimes that's the focus.
When we talk about church growth,
we talk about numerical growth,
numbers adding to the church,
and certainly that's part of it.
But I think we would do ourselves a disservice
if we think that is all of it,
because the reality is that a church
should not simply be growing numerically,
but a church ought to be growing spiritually.
And we'll look at both of those aspects this evening
as we seek to answer this question.
I've titled the message here from Matthew 16,
I, that's Jesus speaking,
I will build my church.
Notice in Matthew 16, in verse number 13,
Jesus came into the coast of Caesarea Philippi,
he asked his disciples saying,
whom do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?
And they said, some say that thou art John the Baptist,
some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets.
He saith unto them, but whom say ye that I am?
And Simon Peter answered and said,
thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
What a great declaration that Peter makes here.
And Jesus tells Peter in verse number 17,
blessed art thou, Simon Barjona,
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee,
but my Father, which is in heaven.
And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter,
and upon this rock I will build my church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
In verse number 18 is a verse that's been taken
out of context many times.
Of course, there's a large known religious organization
that says that Peter is the one in which Jesus
is speaking of here, upon this rock, that being Peter.
I believe as you study the scriptures,
it makes obvious understanding here
that it's on the declaration that Peter made,
not on Peter himself, and that declaration is,
thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
And we find that Jesus says, I will build my church.
As we dig in this evening, I want you to notice with me,
number one, the promise recorded.
Here in our text of scripture,
we see that God gives a promise.
He gives them, he brings them to a particular place.
In fact, I have been, Holly and I had the opportunity
a couple of years ago to be right here in Caesarea Philippi
where Jesus had this interaction with the disciples.
And as we were there, it was of great interest
to understand how Jesus moved with such purpose
during his earthly ministry.
He brought the disciples to this place, Caesarea Philippi,
which was actually not super convenient
with regard to the topography and the journey
and all that would take place.
But he takes them there and he asked them this question,
whom do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?
What a great question.
There, of course, were many within Israel at that time
that had heard about Jesus.
They saw the miracles.
They were familiar with what was taking place
during his earthly ministry.
And so there were a variety of opinions
that had been formed by people in Israel during that time.
And so the disciples say, well,
some think that you're John the Baptist
and some, Elijah and others, Jeremiah
or one of the prophets.
And in other words, there was an uncertainty
amongst the masses of the people.
And so then Jesus looks at the disciples and says,
but in verse number 15, whom say ye that I am?
You know, the world will give you a lot of answers
with regard to who is Jesus.
But the reality is that we better know who Jesus is.
He is God in flesh and he is the savior of the world.
And he, Jesus, God in flesh, he says,
whom say ye that I am?
And Peter says, thou art the Christ,
the son of the living God.
And Jesus, after hearing that declaration of Peter,
he says that this has not been revealed to you
by flesh and blood.
Rather, he says that his father in heaven
has revealed it to him.
And then he says, I will build my church in verse 18,
that promise that we're focused on this evening.
And he says this, the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it.
The interesting dynamic of the location
is that it was truly the place
where they were in Caesarea Philippi.
It would be known as being the gates of hell,
the most wicked, ungodly, idolatrous place
that they could physically be at.
And they would call it the gates of hell.
And all of the pagan, idolatrous worship
that was taking place, that Jesus says,
I'm gonna build my church and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it.
Now that's a great promise and we take that promise
and every promise in the book is mine.
Every chapter, every verse, every line,
we sing the verse, the song.
And I'm so thankful that Peter would say
as he's writing there later
and trying to encourage the people of God,
he talks about the exceeding precious promises
that God gives and no doubt, this is one of them.
We find that as Jesus makes this declaration,
as we have the entirety of the New Testament,
that Jesus says, I will build my church.
He is the one who is the owner, the possessor.
The church is God's idea, not man's idea.
And we find that Jesus says, I will build my church.
It's important that we remember
that Christ is the head of the church.
And Colossians chapter number one in verse number 18
gives us great clarity with regard to the truth
that the church is that he, Christ,
is the head of the church.
It says it this way in verse 18 of Colossians one,
and he is the head of the body of the church
who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
that in all things he might have the preeminence.
No doubt that when we look at verse number 18
that in all things he might have the preeminence,
that's an application that we can take
that in every area of my life,
but surely in the church.
house, he ought to have the preeminence because it is his church, he is the head of the church.
It's actually kind of disappointing as you look at the landscape of Christendom in the
world today and all that's being done in the name of church, in the name of religion, and
how Jesus seems to have no real place in a lot of that stuff that's going on and how
sad that is.
But we find that Christ, he said, I will build my church.
He said in Acts chapter number 20, Paul is speaking to the Ephesian elders and he says
that Christ purchased the church with his blood.
We find that as he's talking to the church in Ephesus in Ephesians 5, he tells husbands
that they loved their wives even as Christ loved the church and gave himself for it.
And so we understand that God has instituted the church and we understand that Christ is
the head of the church and he's made this promise and we must also acknowledge as we're
considering the promise that is recorded that it is Christ who gives the increase.
It is Christ who gives the increase.
Remember what the Bible says in 1 Corinthians, turn there if you would, in 1 Corinthians
chapter number 3, the church in Corinth is a church that is carnal.
In fact, the beginning of chapter 3 deals with that.
We find that chapter 1 addresses the divisions and all that's taking place there in Corinth.
And some of what's happening is there are some that are saying I'm of Paul, I'm of Cephas,
I'm of Apollos and so on and so forth.
And Paul kind of does a system reset, if you will, for the church here and helps them understand
an important truth, an important principle that is pertinent to our discussion this evening
with regard to how is a church supposed to grow.
And so we find there's a promise that Jesus said I will build my church, he's the head
of the church, but he's also the one who gives the increase.
In 1 Corinthians chapter 3, in verse number 5, the Bible says who then is Paul and who
is Apollos?
But ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man.
I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase.
Now I think this evening that all of us tonight that are here are familiar with this verse
of Scripture, with 1 Corinthians 3 and verse number 6, that God gives the increase.
Some plants, some water, but God gives the increase.
And so as we begin to consider the way that a church grows according to the Bible, we
acknowledge the promise.
The promise is that Christ said I will build my church, he's the head of the church, and
he's the one that gives the increase.
But here's the thing that we must be aware of and we must understand if you're taking
notes number two, the process revealed.
We see that there's a promise recorded, but there's a process revealed.
Now the reality is that God could have chosen to build his church any way that he desired
to do so, but he chose, as he reveals to us in his word, the process for which a church
grows numerically and spiritually, he has chosen to use individual members of the church.
Individuals that are saved, following the Lord, he uses us to build his church.
Now I think back to the Old Testament, Noah was given the responsibility to build an ark,
yeah?
He was given the responsibility to build an ark, and he was told to build this ark, he
was given all of the dimensions, he was told that God was going to bring judgment, it was
going to rain, and so on and so forth.
But you know what Noah didn't have to do?
He didn't have to go gather the animals.
Am I right?
God brought the animals to the ark, correct?
God if he chose to, he could simply bring people to a place, but he has commissioned
us as we look at the New Testament, we see the process revealed, that were to go out
and compel them to come in.
Now, does God send people in?
Absolutely.
We find that God is the one that gives the increase, he's the one that gives the fruit,
and he is the one that is at work, but he has not given the process that we just sit
on the premises and expect that he's going to miraculously build the church.
There's a portion in this thing that is our responsibility.
And so as we begin to look at the process that's revealed in the New Testament, we begin
in Matthew chapter 28, and we're going to look at a number of portions of scripture
tonight as we look at this process as it's revealed to us with regard to how a church
is to grow according to the Bible.
In Matthew chapter 28, we're familiar with the portion of scripture, we often refer to
it as the Great Commission.
And I want you to notice in verse number 18 of Matthew 28, the Bible says,
If we were to take this portion of scripture and look at it as being the Great Commission
and separate it into its three particular categories, we would understand that number
one, we're to preach the gospel.
We're to preach the gospel.
The gospel is the power of God unto salvation.
That's why Paul says in Romans chapter number one, I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ.
Why?
For it is the power of God unto salvation to everyone that believeth, to the Jew first
and also to the Greek.
And so we understand that he says as he's speaking to the church in Corinth that Christ
did not send him to baptize but to preach.
And he's to preach the gospel, Christ crucified and risen again.
Isn't that a wonderful message that God has given us to declare?
And we find that if we'd look at the three particular categories, it's preaching the
gospel.
Number two is believer's baptism.
After they trust Christ as their savior, the Bible says they're baptizing them in the name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
And I am thankful.
This is that step, that first step of obedience for every child of God.
It's the public demonstration, identification that I am a follower of Jesus Christ.
I've been saved and I am seeking to walk and to serve the Lord.
In Romans, the Bible talks about as we use that portion of scripture as we baptize, raised
to walk in newness of life.
And so we find the truth of preaching the gospel.
You see souls saved, you baptize them.
And then verse 20, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
And lo, I am with you all even to the end of the world, amen.
The third category would be that of discipleship.
And discipleship is important.
We understand that our responsibility is to make disciples.
And this thing of discipleship, the art of discipleship, if you will, I touched on it
briefly in the message this morning, where Paul was appreciative of the opportunity that
he had to be in the ministry, to have a Timothy that he could invest in, that he could be
a mentor in his life and influence him so that he, Timothy, could take the spiritual
baton, so to speak, as Paul knew that his life would soon come to an end, but Timothy
would be able to run the next leg of the race.
Does that make sense?
If we could use that analogy this evening.
And so Paul is seeking through what we would refer to as discipleship of investing in someone
that would be able to take the reins and go the next mile.
So as we begin to understand this process that's revealed to us in the New Testament
with regard to how a church is growing, how a church grows according to the Bible, we
see this truth within the Great Commission.
But then let's look at practically what it looks like in the book of Acts.
Turn over, if you will, the book of Acts, the second chapter, and I'm going to look
specifically, the first example that we're going to use is the church in Jerusalem.
The church in Jerusalem.
Now we understand that as we would have the opportunity to look here at this church in
Jerusalem and we'd understand that that's where they had started and that's where they
had the opportunity to be able to see a great number of things.
They were very familiar with that area.
And Jesus had said before his ascension, but ye shall receive power after that the Holy
Ghost has come upon you and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, that's where
we start, Judea, Samaria, the uttermost.
But we find that it begins in Jerusalem.
And so on the day of Pentecost in Acts chapter number two, Peter stands up and he's preaching.
Of course, he's giving the truth of the gospel.
We don't have time to look at the message that he preaches, but I want you to notice
in verse 41, the Bible says, then they that gladly received his word.
I believe that that's salvation.
As Peter preached the gospel, they that gladly received his word, they were saved by the
grace of God, because it then says, and were baptized, right?
And so they received the word, they were saved and they were baptized.
We see no instance in the scriptures where somebody is baptized.
No infants are ever baptized in the Bible.
You cannot find it.
There are no children, infants that are baptized.
We find that those that are baptized are always those that have trusted Christ as their savior.
That's why we refer to it as believer's baptism by immersion.
And so when we look at the truth of the Philippian jailer, some people try to twist that thing
out of its context.
When Paul says, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved and thy house,
and they say, oh, so if somebody gets saved, they ought to baptize all their kids so that
they can be saved.
That is not what Paul is teaching in that passage of scripture.
He's saying that the same way you get saved is the same way anybody in your house would
get saved by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ.
And so we see that the Bible says they gladly received his word.
They were baptized.
Notice, in the same day, there were added unto them about 3,000 souls.
And verse number 42, they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship and
in breaking of bread and in prayers.
And notice in verse 42, discipleship.
They're growing.
They continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine.
Notice in verse 47, it says, praising God and having favor with all the people.
Notice this, and the Lord, who?
The Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved.
And so God was working.
We again look at the promise recorded, and we look at those fundamental truths with regard
to that promise that Jesus said, I will build my church, that he's the head of the church,
and that he is also the one that gives the increase.
And now we look at the process, Peter stood up and preached.
And we find that souls were saved, and they were baptized, and they were added to the
church.
And the Lord, he added to the church daily such as should be saved.
And so we see here in Jerusalem, specifically on the day of Pentecost, this growth.
Turn over to chapter five, if you will, and we're still here in Jerusalem, in chapter
number five.
And we see in verse number 12, the Bible says, and by the hands of the apostles were many
signs and wonders wrought among the people, and they were all with one accord in Solomon's
porch.
And of the rest, there's no man joined himself to them, but the people magnified them.
Notice in verse 14, and believers were the more added to the Lord.
Notice it says multitudes, both of men and women.
We find that the church in Jerusalem is growing.
Why is the church in Jerusalem growing?
We talk about numeric and also spiritual growth.
We find that they're growing numerically because the gospel's being preached.
If the gospel's not being preached, people aren't being exposed to the gospel.
They're not trusting Christ as their Savior.
There's no growth in a church.
Amen?
And so as the gospel is being preached, as they're faithfully doing what God had commanded
them to do, people are being saved, they're being baptized, they're being added to the
church, they're being discipled, there's spiritual growth.
Those people that are being discipled, those people that are growing spiritually, you know
what they're doing?
They're going out and they're preaching the gospel.
They're going out and they're telling people about Jesus and they're sharing the gospel.
As we've dealt with over the last three weeks, they're telling people, just like I'm encouraging
that we would tell people, can I tell you what Jesus has done for me?
Can I tell you how the Lord changed my life?
Can I tell you how he saved my soul, how he gave me hope and peace and joy?
Because he changed me, he saved me, I was born again, and what a joy that is.
And so we see the process revealed here in the church in Jerusalem.
We see these couple of references.
There are a number of other references that we could look to, but as we begin to see this
promise recorded, but then there's a process.
The disciples were faithfully doing what they were commanded to do.
They were not just sitting around and waiting for some kind of movement, no, they were out
preaching and God was using the preaching of his word.
The Holy Spirit was convicting individuals of their need for Christ and the church was
growing.
There are estimates that the church at Jerusalem potentially reached a size of nearly 100,000
people.
Now scholars, biblical scholars have various ideas and opinions with regard to the actual
number, but it is of interest that in the day of Pentecost, it says there were 3,000
souls.
After the situation at the gate, beautiful there, when that man that was lame was healed,
it says that there were 5,000 added.
And then the Bible stops giving us numbers, it says multitude, and then it says multitudes.
And obviously if God wanted to give us the exact number, he could have, but we see that
there was growth in the church in Jerusalem.
It was not simply numeric growth, but we see also that it was spiritual growth as they
continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine.
They were discipling the individuals that they had seen trust Christ as their savior
and that they had had the opportunity to baptize them.
We find that as we continue to study through the book of Acts, you have the opportunity
to see how the persecution intensifies and it kind of reaches this high point, if you
will, in Acts chapter number seven with the stoning of Stephen.
And we find that Stephen is stoned and we find that during that situation, he had preached
a wonderful message.
He knew the Old Testament, he was able to very effectively preach and God brought conviction
upon those individuals and they stoned him and he died.
The Bible tells us that they laid his clothes there at a man's feet by the name of Saul
and we find that the persecution intensifies in chapter number eight.
But the Bible says something interesting in Acts chapter number eight and it's worth our
mentioning in verse number four, it says, therefore, they that were scattered abroad
went everywhere, notice what it says, preaching the word.
Those that were scattered, why were they scattered?
Were they were scattered because of the persecution?
Because of the enemy and the opposition, the adversity, and they tried to really silence
the believers in Jerusalem, but they that were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching
the word.
You find in Acts eight that they're in Samaria.
You find that as you continue throughout the entirety of the book of Acts, you eventually
get to the uttermost and you find that they're preaching the gospel to the known world.
What a blessing to consider the obedience, to understand the process that is revealed
to us in the scriptures.
I'm going to take two examples, obviously there are a number of churches that are described
or detailed to us in the New Testament and I'm going to take two examples.
I'm going to start first with the church in Thessalonica.
Take your Bibles, if you will, and turn over to Acts chapter number 17.
Of course, many of us would be familiar with the fact that during, there in chapter number
13 is the first missionary journey, the second missionary journey, there's a third missionary
journey, and how that on those missionary journeys, what were they doing?
They were sending Paul and whoever was on his team, they were sending them out to preach
the gospel, to baptize those that were believers, that trust at Christ, and then to disciple
them.
And this is a pattern that we're going to see repeated in every time as they go to a
new city, to a new region, they preach the gospel, people are saved, they're baptized,
they're added to the church, they're discipled, and thus a church grows.
Many of these churches, obviously the churches are established, right, the starting, the
founding of these churches, and then there's the growth.
In Acts chapter 17, I'm going to use the example here of the church in Thessalonica.
The Bible tells us in verse number one, now, when they had passed through Ampipholus and
Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews.
And Paul, as his matter was, by the way, if you want to do a study, you study that phrase,
it's a great phrase, and be able to see the way in which the apostle Paul did ministry.
He went in unto them and three Sabbath days reasoned with them, notice what it says, out
of the scriptures.
So what is Paul doing?
He gets to Thessalonica and he begins to preach.
What is he preaching?
Verse three, opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from
the dead, and that this Jesus whom I preach unto you is Christ.
What is he doing?
He's doing exactly what we're talking about, this process.
He gets to Thessalonica, he goes to the synagogue, he begins to reason with them out of the scriptures.
If you look back at some of the other instances in which Paul is traveling on these missionary
journeys, on the first missionary journey, he gets to the synagogue and he's sitting
there and they say, does anyone have anything to say?
Oh, what a great opportunity.
And Paul's like, yeah, he stands up and he begins to preach.
And we find here in Thessalonica for three Sabbath days, the Bible says, so we assume
we understand this, that he's there for just a short period of time, about three weeks,
that he's preaching the gospel.
He's opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the
dead.
Isn't that the gospels we preach?
The death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus Christ.
The burial isn't mentioned here specifically in that term, but we see that he suffered,
he was dead, and he rose from the dead, obviously.
we understand the burial is inferred here.
And he says, whom I preach unto you,
this Jesus, excuse me, whom I preach unto you is Christ.
Well, what was the truth all the way back in Matthew 16?
Whom do ye say that I am?
Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
Who is Jesus?
Well, he is the Christ, the anointed one, the Messiah.
They knew who Jesus the man was.
There were people in Israel that were familiar with Jesus.
Whom do men say that I am?
Well, John the Baptist, Elijah, Jeremiah,
one of the prophets, but whom say ye that I am?
Thou art the Christ, the anointed one, the Messiah,
the Son of God.
And here Paul is preaching the same thing
that Peter declared when Jesus asked the question
that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
And so we find that Jesus said upon this rock,
upon that statement, that truth that was declared,
I will build my church
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
So it would make sense as you study the scriptures
that as Paul goes out and he is preaching the gospel
and he's faithfully doing what God had told him to do,
that there's a church that's being built,
being established, growing.
All right, we see that here in Acts chapter number 17.
We notice as we look at this truth in Acts 17,
that after he preaches in verse four,
and some of them believed and consorted with Paul
and Silas, one of the devout Greeks, a great multitude,
and one of the chief women, not a few.
So there were souls saved.
We would understand as we've coupled this
with reading the book of 1 Thessalonians,
that obviously they were baptized, they were taught.
Paul talks about what he taught them while he was there.
And he would follow up by sending Timothy to be there.
And so we find that the opposition gathers together.
They run them out of town.
Paul has to leave and so on and so forth.
But I want you with the understanding
of this portion of scripture in Acts 17,
now turn over to 1 Thessalonians chapter one.
Because we look at the church and how it's growing
and we find its start, its initial growth here in Acts 17.
But as we come to 1 Thessalonians chapter number one,
we begin to see how this growth continues.
How does the growth continue?
In 1 Thessalonians chapter one,
Paul says this in verse number seven,
so that ye, so now he's talking about the believers
in Thessalonica, he had already given truth
about how they came, actually let me back up and read it.
In verse number two, we give thanks to God always
for you all, making mention of you in our prayers,
remembering without ceasing your work of faith,
your labor of love, your patience of hope
in our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the sight of God and our Father,
knowing brethren, beloved, your election of God,
for our gospel came not unto you in word only,
but also in power and in the Holy Ghost
and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of men
ye were, we were among you for your sake.
And so Paul in verse number five is talking about
his arrival there in the ministry in Thessalonica
that we just read in Acts 17,
and now in verse number six it says,
and ye became followers of us and of the Lord,
having received the word in much affliction
with joy of the Holy Ghost.
So now these people are saved.
That's the start of the initial growth
of the church in Thessalonica.
How's the church in Thessalonica gonna continue to grow?
Is the church in Thessalonica gonna grow?
Is it supposed to grow?
And so we find in verse number seven
that Paul then says, so that ye were in samples
to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia.
You understand that Paul could not stay in Thessalonica.
He was run out of town.
I mean, he had to get out of there.
They were gonna kill him,
and we find that there were saved people
that were left there in Thessalonica,
and they began to preach the gospel.
Notice how it's described in verse number eight,
for from you, from the church in Thessalonica,
from you sounded out the word of the Lord,
not only in Macedonia and Achaia,
but also in every place your faith to God
were to spread abroad,
so that we need not to speak anything.
For they themselves show of us what manner of entering in
we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from idols
to serve the living and true God,
and to wait for his son from heaven,
whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus,
which delivered us from the wrath to come.
And so we find that here we begin to see
how is the church, the local church in Thessalonica,
it's a church that was established,
but now how is that church gonna grow?
Well, they have to take the responsibility
to follow the process that God has established
of preaching the gospel, people get saved,
they get baptized, they join the church,
they disciple them, and those people go out
and they preach the gospel, and guess what's happening?
The church is growing.
The church is not only growing numerically,
but the church is growing spiritually.
And we find that as you look at the church in Thessalonica,
we see this numeric growth that would be possible
because of their vision and their understanding
of preaching the gospel here in 1 Thessalonians 1,
but I wanna note for you in 2 Thessalonians 1,
the spiritual growth that we see
in the church in Thessalonica.
I asked the follow-up question by way of introduction,
not only should a church grow spiritually,
should a church grow, but I asked this,
is all growth numeric?
The answer is no, there should be numeric growth,
but there should be spiritual growth.
And by the way, I don't know that we can say
one is better than the other,
but spiritual growth is vital.
It is absolutely imperative
that God's people are growing spiritually,
and I believe that as they grow spiritually,
the byproduct is going to be numeric growth.
Because as we're growing spiritually,
we're doing what we're supposed to be doing,
and therefore the numeric growth comes.
Does that make sense?
See, if we learn, if we learn to abide in him,
if we learn to do, as I'm preaching on Wednesday nights,
to do what we ought to do,
then God is going to bless,
and God is going to add to the church,
because he's the one that made the promise,
he's the one that gives the increase.
And so the spiritual growth is so imperative.
Remember, Paul says, I believe he wrote
the book of Hebrews, he says there in Hebrews,
for in the time that you ought to be teachers,
you have need that one teach you,
and it's interesting because he says
that you need to be taught the basics.
We find that there was a time
that they ought to be teachers,
there should have been spiritual growth,
but they were, unfortunately they were not growing,
and Paul really reproves them,
rebukes them because of that.
But we find here in 2 Thessalonians 1,
notice in verse number three,
Paul says this, we are bound to thank God always
for you, brethren, as it is meat.
Notice what he says, because your faith,
because that your faith groweth exceedingly.
He doesn't say your numbers are growing exceedingly,
he says your faith groweth exceedingly.
Then notice this, in the charity of every one of you all
toward each other aboundeth.
The church in Thessalonica, as we take as a model,
I said we're gonna look at two churches,
we're out of time, we're gonna look at just the church
at Thessalonica tonight as our example.
I was gonna look at the church at Ephesus,
but we won't have time, you could look at the church
at Philippi as well, but you notice specifically here
as we use this example of how a church is to grow
according to the Bible, the process was followed.
Paul ends up in a city, he goes to the synagogue,
he preaches the gospel, people get saved,
they're baptized, they're discipled,
those people then are going out and telling other people
about Jesus, the church is growing numerically,
those believers in the church are being discipled
and they're growing spiritually because their faith
groweth exceedingly, their charity or love
toward one another aboundeth, there's this growth
that's taking place spiritually among the people
in the church in Thessalonica and God is at work.
Let me remind you and we'll study it in a few weeks
on Sunday morning, in 2 Timothy chapter number two,
in 2 Timothy chapter two and verse number two,
and this is again if we could summarize the process
that is revealed to us in God's word with regard
to how a church grows according to the Bible.
In 2 Timothy two and verse number one,
Paul says, thou therefore my son,
be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
And the things that thou hast heard of me
among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men
who shall be able to teach others also.
Do you see the perpetuity in this verse of scripture
where Paul says, listen Timothy,
you've heard some things from me
and the things that you've heard from me,
those same things you need to teach to others.
these faithful men, and as you teach it to these faithful men,
they then will be able to teach it to others.
Wow. You think about the propagating of the gospel
and the responsibility that we have,
and you see the growth in a church.
Let me say this.
There are a lot of ways to get a crowd.
Getting a crowd is not really the goal.
If we wanted to get a crowd,
I'm just going to be extremely blunt this evening,
if we wanted to get a crowd,
we would stop using the King James Bible,
we would get rid of our hymnals,
we'd get rid of our suits and our ties,
we'd get rid of our instruments,
we'd get some drums up here, and so on and so forth,
we'd change our lighting, we'd change our paint stuff,
and you can get a crowd.
You can get a crowd.
Washington, D.C. is known for having some pitiful sports teams.
Am I not right?
Do you know that they still charge like 100 bucks
to get a ticket to go to the game?
And they still get people that go.
Think about the teams that are good.
They can get a crowd.
There's a lot of means.
Listen, when we talk about church growth,
we're not trying to adopt the corporate mentality
of how does a church grow.
We need to do this and we need to do that,
and if we start at this and if we did that.
No, God gave us the process,
and God's process works
because God's process is tied to God's promise,
and God's promise is that I will build my church
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
We find today that as we seek to answer this question,
how does a church grow according to the Bible?
I hope that we first recognize that God has given us a promise
and that growth is not just numeric,
though it includes numeric growth,
growth is also spiritual.
And as we take and apply the truth,
the process that God has revealed to us in his word,
just as we have seen the church at Jerusalem
and the church in Thessalonica,
we see churches that are growing numerically and spiritually.
We often would refer to the church in Thessalonica this way.
They were a model church.
Why were they a model church?
They weren't a perfect church.
There's no perfect church, but they were a model church.
Why?
Well, because they took the truth that God had given to them
and they applied the truth and they worked it out
and they reached people with the gospel
and they had a church that was growing numerically
and a church that was growing spiritually.
And to God be the glory.
I'm thankful that the church is God's church.
It is.
I'm thankful to be a part of, a member of a local church,
to have an opportunity to serve in the capacity
that God would give us the opportunity to serve him.
And we desire to see a church that's growing.
But we must follow the process that God has given to us.
We must go forth preaching the gospel
as we see souls saved, baptizing them and discipling them.
And as we engage in teaching and discipleship
that those that are being trained and equipped
are able to go out and duplicate, multiply
what we are seeking to do.
So I hope tonight that that answers the question,
how does a church grow according to the Bible?
And I hope that we would be instruments in God's hand
that God would be able to use to see his church,
this church, our church grow for his honor and for his glory.
Let's pray together.
Father, we love you.
We do thank you for loving us.
We thank you for the opportunity that we have to serve you.
We thank you for your word and for the truth contained therein.
I thank you for this question that was submitted
and for the opportunity that we have to study,
to examine the scriptures,
to see the promise that's recorded for us
and to then analyze the process that is revealed to us
that was incorporated by the early church,
the church in Jerusalem, in Thessalonica.
We could look at Philippi and Ephesus as well,
and we could look at seeing how those churches grew,
not only numerically, but spiritually.
And I pray, God, that you would help us
to be doers of the word and not hearers only.
Help us to grow spiritually.
Help us, Lord, to grow numerically.
Help us to honor and glorify thee.
We'll thank you for it in Christ.
And we pray, would you stand with me?
Heads are bowed, eyes are closed.
And we're gonna have a moment of invitation.
Kimberly's gonna play quietly on the piano.
And as she does, the altar is open.